Tesla Motors Inc. and SolarCity Corp. shareholders approved the electric-car maker’s purchase of the solar installer in a deal designed to test their shared Chairman Elon Musk’s vision for a viable one-stop shop for clean energy consumers.

More than 85 percent of Tesla shares voted in favor of the deal, the Palo Alto company said Thursday, adding that SolarCity shareholders also approved the acquisition. The deal, valued at about $2 billion, integrates the maker of Model S and upcoming Model 3 sedans with the San Mateo installer of rooftop solar panels.

Shareholders are signing off on Musk’s plan to combine and more efficiently run two companies that have a track record for fleeting profits and frequent fundraising needs. Tesla has lost about $4.8 billion in market capitalization since its initial offer to buy SolarCity on June 21, while the latter company’s value declined by about $86 million.

Tesla has forecast that SolarCity will add $1 billion in revenue to the combined company next year and $500 million in cash to its balance sheet over the next three years. Joining Tesla’s retail network with SolarCity’s installers and consolidating the two companies’ supply chains may result in an estimated $150 million in savings within a year.

Musk owns 21 percent of Tesla and 22 percent of SolarCity, making him the largest shareholder of both companies. He and Antonio Gracias, who also serves as director at both companies, recused themselves from a board vote on the takeover July 30. The all-stock deal is worth $20.23 per share, a premium of 2 percent based on SolarCity’s closing price Wednesday. The premium was about 35 percent when first announced.

Tesla shares rose 2.6 percent to close at $188.66, while SolarCity shares gained 2.9 percent to $20.40.

The quarterly profit Tesla reported last month was the first in eight quarters. SolarCity has recorded losses in six of the last eight quarters. The two companies have conducted five separate equity offerings since SolarCity first sold shares to the public in December 2012.

Investor Jim Chanos, whose firm Kynikos Associates Ltd. saw weakness in Enron Inc. before its collapse, has been highly critical of the merger, in part because of the $2.89 billion in SolarCity debt Tesla will be taking on.

The deal drew mixed recommendations from proxy advisory firms, with Institutional Shareholder Services giving its blessing and Glass Lewis & Co. rejecting it as a “thinly veiled bailout plan.” Institutional Shareholder Services said Tesla would be able to bridge cash-burning SolarCity’s funding gap and called the deal a “necessary step” in the electric-car maker’s push to become an integrated sustainable energy company.

The combined company’s attention will be on President-elect Donald Trump’s policies. The real estate mogul has vowed to relax environmental regulations and has tapped Myron Ebell, a climate-change skeptic, to head his Environmental Protection Agency transition team.

Gordon Johnson, an analyst at Axiom Capital Management Inc., downgraded seven solar companies Tuesday, citing his expectation for less favorable renewable energy policies from Trump’s administration.
