
To Norris, to John Buffalo, and to Scott Meredith



NORMAN MAILER



Part One


In the event that you’ve just picked up this book, and know little or nothing about it, and are unsure whether you should read it, I want to urge you with all my being that you must read The Executioner’s Song. I want to further guarantee that you will finish it. It’s the fastest 1,000 pages you will ever know.

It’s necessary to say, up front, that whatever you might know or think about Norman Mailer, or whatever you might assume about the man, his work, his personality or his sociopolitical views, none of that information (or misinformation) applies here. This is a story that bears no markings of what we presume to be Mailer’s prose style or point of view. The Executioner’s Song is completely something other. Mailer once said that the book was given to him, whole and complete, from God, and it’s difficult to argue with that. The Executioner’s Song cannot be improved. Mailer did not write a better book, and I’m not sure anyone of his generation wrote a better book.

I urge you to read this book without knowing anything more about the story it tells. By now, in 2012, the vast majority of readers new to The Executioner’s Song will have little to no knowledge about Gary Mark Gilmore, the book’s central figure, where he came from, what he did. That is to be expected, and perhaps even embraced for our purposes here. Reading his story without knowing the outcome will only enhance the experience—it gives the book unimaginable tension and scope—and so I urge you to read nothing more of this introduction, which will discuss some of the issues the book raises and will reveal too much. Come back to these pages only after you’ve read the book, if you come back to them all.





Part Two


When The Executioner’s Song was published, Gary Gilmore was as well-known in the United States as any film star or athlete. Now, in 2012, very few people under fifty would be able to identify Gilmore without some prodding. His crimes were not at all unusual then or now. Men go on similar killing sprees every week in this violent nation.

There were two things notable about Gilmore during the time of his crimes, arrest, and trial. First is that the death penalty had been reinstituted in 1976, after a ten–year moratorium, and Gilmore was the first person executed in the modern era of capital punishment in America. His execution reignited our national taste for vengeance. Since his execution, over 1,000 others have been killed by the government of the United States.

And though anti–death penalty lawyers fought to stay Gilmore’s execution, and were twice successful in doing so, Gilmore himself wanted to die. In prison, he twice tried to kill himself. When third-party appeals dragged on, he insisted that he be executed, and finally a panel of judges gave him his wish. “Among other people who have rights,” one of the judges said, “Mr. Gilmore has his own. If an error is being made and the execution goes forward, he brought that on himself.” When Gilmore was facing his firing squad, Gilmore was asked for any last words. “Let’s do it,” he said.

The execution of Gary Gilmore was crude and it was barbaric. He was wearing a T-shirt. A bag was put over his head. In a converted prison cannery, he was strapped to what looked like an electric chair. Twenty people were watching as five men with rifles, hidden behind a screen, shot bullets into his torso until he was dead. When he was cremated, his ashes were placed into a 59-cent bread bag and then scattered over Utah by his uncle. It was an ugly end to a life of ugliness.


Why, then, write 1,000 pages about the man? The answer is inconvenient. The answer is a holy pain in the ass. The answer is that murderers are fully human, too, and there is beauty to their lives, and joy in their days, and love, and music, and even aspirations of bliss or at least peace. The terrible, exasperating thing about humans is how goodness and gentleness, and utter depravity and disregard for human life, can be contained within the same person, and in terrifyingly close proximity.

And so Gary Gilmore, a troubled young man in prison for armed robbery, writes eloquent, sensitive letters to his cousin Brenda. And so Gary Gilmore, who frequently gets in violent altercations at the U.S. Penitentiary in Marion, Illinois, draws exquisite pictures in his cell, accomplished renderings of children, among other subjects, and has an IQ of 130. And so Gary Gilmore, when released from prison, moves in with his uncle and quickly falls in love with Nicole Barrett, a beautiful and confused single mother of two. And so Gary Gilmore, shortly after Nicole leaves him, goes on a crime spree that claims two lives.

By the time Gilmore commits the murders in The Executioner’s Song, Mailer has already done a terrible thing: he’s made us care about the man. We want Gilmore to live up to the expectations Brenda places on him. We want him to make his uncle Vern proud. We want him to work hard, build a new life, and we want him and Nicole to make something of themselves. But his narrative follows a different path.

On two successive nights in 1976, Gary Gilmore committed murder. First he killed a gas station attendant, after robbing the station of less than $100. Next he killed a motel manager, after taking a little more than that. They were the kind of senseless murders that even Gilmore’s closest friends and family couldn’t explain. They never doubted he did the crimes—they knew what he was capable of—but still, he could have robbed the stores without murdering the clerks. He could have borrowed the money he needed. But instead he used a stolen gun to kill both men in cold blood. And in tiny Provo, Utah, there was only one man anyone suspected: Gary Gilmore. Before he was arrested, even his aunt and uncle knew it was him. “Do you think he did it?” Ida asks. “Yeah, he did it, the stupid shit,” Vern says.

Gilmore was locked up, tried, and convicted. With the death penalty reinstated, Gilmore’s notoriety grew. When he refused to appeal his verdict and insisted that he wanted to die, his story became known around the world. And it was then that Lawrence Schiller, a young photographer and producer, gained access to Gilmore and his family, friends, and ex-lovers, and began the process of meticulously interviewing them all, gaining a novelistic level of detail that was unprecedented and has yet to be matched in the history of American journalism.

Schiller then reached out to Norman Mailer, who was then one of the most famous, celebrated, and controversial authors in the world. Schiller asked Mailer to convert his notes and interviews into what became The Executioner’s Song. And this book gives us every step Gilmore took from his violent beginnings to his brief dance with freedom and even love, to his violent end. It reveals Gilmore to be likable, irritating, immature, violent, doomed—but always a three-dimensional human being capable of charming anyone he meets. It reveals a family of profoundly giving and steady people who try to give Gary a new life but cannot heal a broken man. It reveals a judicial system in the United States that was and is deeply flawed, wildly inefficient, but largely well-intentioned. And it reveals a nation that is full of decent, astonishingly generous people who then and now feel that the best thing to do with a murderer is to murder him.


It’s important to know where Norman Mailer was in his career when he wrote this book. Since his first novel, The Naked and the Dead, he had published books—including Armies of the Night and The Deer Park and An American Dream—to great acclaim, and some to great opprobrium. He was considered one of the most powerful stylists of his generation, his sentences muscular, hyper-intelligent, always unmistakably his.

One can imagine the shock, then, of reading even the first few sentences of The Executioner’s Song: “Brenda was six when she fell out of the apple tree. She climbed to the top and the limb with the good apples broke off. Gary caught her as the branch came scraping down. They were scared.”

There and throughout the book the prose is flat, unvarnished, plainspoken. The words on the page sound like the people the book depicts—shoemakers, mechanics, motel managers of Provo, Utah. Mailer has sublimated his own style, and his own ideas, to the story, and a fair argument could be made that this sublimation, rather than the mad stylistic tap-dancing of, say, The Naked and the Dead, is the greater feat. Nowhere do we hear Norman Mailer’s thoughts about Gary Gilmore, or Nicole Barrett, or capital punishment, or the West. Surely his point of view comes through, obliquely, by what he chooses to include in the book, and what he doesn’t. But we’re left with the story, unimpeded, uncommented-upon, and the story, here, is plenty, the details so exacting, so revealing, that every section of the book—it’s told in small, isolated chunks, like ice floes detached and self-sufficient—is its own small, perfect, and revelatory prose-poem.

“I know you,” Gilmore says the first time he meets Nicole. He doesn’t mean they’ve met before; they haven’t. They meet by chance at a friend’s house, and immediately he says that to her: “I know you.” And he means he knows that she, like him, is incomplete, wayward, prone to terrible mistakes. They talk late into the night. He asks her, “Hey, there’s a place in the darkness. You know what I mean? I think I met you there. I knew you there.” And so begins one of the most convincing love stories in all of American literature.

He quickly moves in with Nicole and her daughters, and we have the sense—and certainly new readers will—that the two are destined for each other. That they will be forever entwined, even if their love is full of chaos and rupture. Nicole senses danger early on, and looks for an exit. She hedges her bets with her ex-husband, among other lovers. And just as quickly and capriciously as the romance began, it ends. At least for a while.

Did Gilmore kill because his heart was broken? Here the book gives us choices. We are not led to one conclusion, as would happen if the story were told by a lesser author. No, instead we’re given the full messy range of pathologies. Gary was born bad. Or he was born fine, then was abused and twisted into an ugly shape. Or he was born fine, then twisted, then imprisoned, and then was given one last chance at redemption. He flirted briefly with decency but couldn’t hack a life within boundaries of propriety. At the first obstacle, he went off the rails. Or maybe he was destined to kill and be killed.

Every time there is a place for Mailer to tell us the answer, to distill what we know down to a manageable conclusion, he gives us more raw, exasperating reality and a void where an easy conclusion would be expected. When the cops, prosecutors, and judges enter the picture, we expect, and perhaps even want them to be crooked, bloodthirsty, unforgiving. But they’re frustratingly decent and morally complex, and anything but monolithic. When the media enters the book, they, too, are not the cartoonish, sensationalizing ghouls we’re given to expect. They have nuanced motives and act in damnable human ways.

Good god, it would be easier if this were not the case. If murderers were of a wholly different species, if they were beasts who we couldn’t talk to, relate to, understand in any way, if they were incapable of love or light—it would be far easier. But this is not the case. They are almost always people precisely like ourselves, flawed and good and weak, capable of acts of courage and horrible mistakes.

I met a killer a few months ago. We were both dressed in tuxedos. This was at the Dayton Literary Peace Prize awards, and I was handing an award to Wilbert Rideau, who confessed to two murders committed in the heat of a robbery when he was 19. During his 44 years in prison, he became a prolific writer, a jailhouse journalist who exposed inhumane conditions at the Louisiana State Penitentiary in Angola. He was released in 2006, and his memoir, the book for which he was getting the prize in Dayton, In the Place of Justice, tells his story, from being a confused kid caught in a bank robbery gone bad, to a man who had fully taken responsibility for his crimes and who had improved himself and contributed mightily to the betterment of thousands of lives.

Before the ceremony, I shook Rideau’s hand, and we talked about Baton Rouge—where he’s from—and about New Orleans and the weather in Dayton. His face is heavily lined, his eyes small and bright and wary, and his accent a deep Louisiana drawl. Even months later, writing these words, I am torn about my experience standing and talking with Rideau. And I can only think that the chiaroscuro sense of right and wrong that was instilled in me, that was reinforced by the simplistic moralizing of our news and entertainment, had convinced me that a person who kills is no longer a person. It would have been far easier, for everyone, if Rideau had been erased after he committed his crimes. He did a terrible thing, and eliminating him would have left the world tidier. Or so goes the logic of the last fifty years of American justice. We throw away flawed people, people who have made terrible mistakes, with regularity and great alacrity. We jail drug dealers for decades, and we execute killers. We want them away. Out of sight. Off the planet. Gone.

But what if they live on? Wilbert Rideau lived on. He told the world of life in prison, and told the world of the circumstances of his crimes and his rehabilitation. He became a productive human being when he was once, briefly, a force of destruction.

And though we erased him, shot him, and cremated him, Gary Gilmore lives on in this book, and we learn from his life. What do we learn? Maybe we learn that America is a uniquely violent and unforgiving place, a perpetual West where the landscape—an existential nothingness bordered by glorious unattainable mountains—both mocks the individual and inspires him toward desperate acts. Maybe we learn that Gary Gilmore was fully human, but not fully equipped to live among us; that we’re essentially a decent people, wanting contentment and prosperity for all, seeking harmony so tenaciously that we need to kill those who threaten it. Maybe it’s not what we learn that’s crucial, but the questions we’re left with. Will we always be a manic-depressive nation of the greatest and most vile achievements? Will we always be a nation of both astronauts and mass-murderers? The Executioner’s Song doesn’t answer these questions, but it comes as close to solving the enigma of America as any other work of art we have.





Deep in my dungeon

I welcome you here

Deep in my dungeon

I worship your fear

Deep in my dungeon

I dwell

I do not know

if I wish you well.

—old prison rhyme





Book One


WESTERN VOICES





PART ONE



Gary





Chapter 1


THE FIRST DAY



1


Brenda was six when she fell out of the apple tree. She climbed to the top and the limb with the good apples broke off. Gary caught her as the branch came scraping down. They were scared. The apple trees were their grandmother’s best crop and it was forbidden to climb in the orchard. She helped him drag away the tree limb and they hoped no one would notice. That was Brenda’s earliest recollection of Gary.


She was six and he was seven and she thought he was swell. He might be rough with the other kids but never with her. When the family used to come out to Grandpa Brown’s farm on Decoration Day or Thanksgiving, Brenda would only play with the boys. Later, she remembered those parties as peaceful and warm. There were no raised voices, no cussing, just a good family get-together. She remembered liking Gary so well she would not bother to see who else was there—Hi, Grandma, can I have a cookie?—come on, Gary, let’s go.


Right outside the door was a lot of open space. Beyond the backyard were orchards and fields and then the mountains. A dirt road went past the house and up the slope of the valley into the canyon.


Gary was kind of quiet. There was one reason they got along. Brenda was always gabbing and he was a good listener. They had a lot of fun. Even at that age he was real polite. If you got into trouble, he’d come back and help you out.


Then he moved away. Gary and his brother Frank Jr., who was a year older, and his mother, Bessie, went to join Frank Sr., in Seattle. Brenda didn’t see any more of him for a long time. Her next memory of Gary was not until she was thirteen. Then her mother, Ida, told her that Aunt Bessie had called from Portland, and was in a very blue mood. Gary had been put in Reform School. So Brenda wrote him a letter, and Gary sent an answer all the way back from Oregon, and said he felt bad putting his family through what he did.


On the other hand, he sure didn’t like it in Reform School. His dream when he came out, he wrote, was to be a mobster and push people around. He also said Gary Cooper was his favorite movie star.


Now Gary was the kind of boy who would not send a second letter until he received your reply. Years could go by but he wasn’t going to write if you hadn’t answered his last. Since Brenda, before long, was married—she was sixteen and thought she couldn’t live without a certain guy—her correspondence lapsed. She might mail a letter from time to time, but Gary didn’t really get back into Brenda’s life until a couple of years ago when Aunt Bessie called again. She was still upset about Gary. He had been sent from Oregon State Penitentiary to Marion, Illinois, and that, Bessie informed Ida, was the place they built to replace Alcatraz. She was not accustomed to thinking of her son as a dangerous criminal who could be kept only in a Maximum Security prison.


It made Brenda begin to think of Bessie. In the Brown family with its seven sisters and two brothers, Bessie must have been the one who was talked about the most. Bessie had green eyes and black hair and was one of the prettiest girls around. She had an artistic temperament and hated to work in the field because she didn’t want the sun to make her tough and tanned and leathery. Her skin was very white. She wanted to keep that look. Even if they were Mormons farming in the desert, she liked pretty clothes and finery, and would wear white dresses with wide Chinese sleeves and white gloves she’d made herself. She and a girl friend would get all dressed up and hitchhike to Salt Lake City. Now she was old and arthritic.


Brenda started writing to Gary once more. Before long, they were into quite a correspondence. Gary’s intelligence was really coming through. He hadn’t reached high school before they put him in the Reformatory, so he must have done a lot of reading in prison to get this much education together. He certainly knew how to use big words. Brenda couldn’t pronounce a few of the longer ones, let alone be sure of their meaning.


Sometimes, Gary would delight her by adding little drawings in the margin; they were damn good. She spoke of trying to do some artwork herself, and mailed a sample of her stuff. He corrected her drawing in order to show the mistakes she was making. Good enough to tutor at long distance.


Once in a while Gary would remark that having been in prison so long he felt more like the victim than the man who did the deed. Of course, he did not deny having committed a crime or two. He was always letting Brenda know he was not Charley Good Guy.


Yet after they had been sending letters for a year or more, Brenda noticed a change. Gary no longer seemed to feel he would never get out of jail. His correspondence became more hopeful. Brenda said to her husband, Johnny, one day, Well, I really think Gary’s ready.


She had gotten into the habit of reading his letters to Johnny, and to her mother and father and sister. Sometimes after discussing those letters, her parents, Vern and Ida, would discuss what Brenda ought to answer, and they would feel full of concern for Gary. Her sister, Toni, often spoke of how much his drawings impressed her. There was so much sorrow in those pictures. Children with great big sad eyes.


Once Brenda asked: “How does it feel to live in your country club out there? Just what kind of world do you live in?”


He had written back:


I don’t think there’s any way to adequately describe this sort of life to anyone that’s never experienced it. I mean, it would be totally alien to you and your way of thinking, Brenda. It’s like another planet.

—which words, in her living room, offered visions of the moon.


Being here is like walking up to the edge and looking over 24 hours a day for more days then you care to recall.

He finished by writing:


Above all, it’s a matter of staying strong no matter what happens.


Sitting around the Christmas tree, they thought of Gary and wondered if he might be with them next year. Talked about his chances for parole. He had already asked Brenda to sponsor him, and she had replied, “If you screw up, I’ll be the first against you.”


Still, the family was more in favor than not. Toni, who had never written him a line, offered to be a co-sponsor. While some of Gary’s notes were terribly depressed, and the one where he asked if Brenda would sponsor him had no more good feeling than a business memo, there were a few that really got to you.


Dear Brenda,

Received your letter tonight and it made me feel nice. Your attitude helps restore my old soul…. A place to stay and a job guarantee me an awful lot, but the fact that somebody cares, means more to the parole board. I’ve always been more or less alone before.




Only after the Christmas party did it come over Brenda that she was going to sponsor a man whom she hadn’t seen in close to thirty years. It made her think of Toni’s remark that Gary had a different face in every photograph.


Now, Johnny began to get concerned about it. He had been all for Brenda writing to Gary, but when it came down to bringing him into their family, Johnny began to have a few apprehensions. It wasn’t that he was embarrassed to harbor a criminal, Johnny simply wasn’t that sort of person, he just felt like there’s going to be problems.


For one thing, Gary wasn’t coming into an average community. He would be entering a Mormon stronghold. Things were tough enough for a man just out of prison without having to deal with people who thought drinking coffee and tea was sinful.


Nonsense, said Brenda. None of their friends were that observing. She and Johnny hardly qualified as a typical straitlaced Utah County couple.

Yes, said Johnny, but think of the atmosphere. All those super-clean BYU kids getting ready to go out as missionaries. Walking on the street could make you feel you were at a church supper. There had, said Johnny, to be tension.


Brenda hadn’t been married to Johnny for eleven years without coming to know that her husband was the type for peace at any price. No waves in his life if he could help it. Brenda wouldn’t say she looked for trouble, but a few waves kept life interesting. So Brenda suggested that Gary might only stay weekends with them, but live with Vern and Ida. That satisfied John.


Well, he told her with a grin, if I don’t go along, you’re going to do it anyway. He was right. She could feel awfully sympathetic to anybody who was boxed in. “He’s paid his dues,” she told Johnny, “and I want to bring him home.”


Those were the words she used when she talked to Gary’s future parole officer. When asked, Why do you want this man here? Brenda answered, “He’s been in jail thirteen years. I think it’s time Gary came home.”


Brenda knew her power in conversations like this. She might be that much nearer to thirty-five than thirty, but she hadn’t gone into marriage four times without knowing she was pretty attractive on the hoof, and the parole officer, Mont Court, was blond and tall with a husky build. Just an average good-looking American guy, very much on the Mr. Clean side, but all the same, Brenda thought, pretty likable. He was sympathetic to the idea of a second chance, and would flex with you if there was a good reason. If not, he would come down pretty hard. That was how she read him. He seemed just the kind of man for Gary.


He had worked, Mont Court told her, with a lot of people who had just come out of prison, and he warned Brenda that there would be a recycling period. Maybe a little trouble here or there, a drunken brawl. She thought he was broad-minded for a Mormon. A man couldn’t, he explained, walk out of prison and go right into straight normal living. It was like coming out of the Service, especially if you’d been held a prisoner of war. You didn’t become a civilian immediately. He said if Gary had problems, she should try to encourage him to come in and talk about it.


Then Mont Court and another probation officer paid a visit to Vern at his shoe shop and looked into her father’s ability as a shoe repair man. They must have been impressed because nobody in these parts was going to know more about shoes than Vern Damico, and he would, after all, not only give Gary a place to live, but a job in his shop.


A letter arrived from Gary to announce that he was going to be released in a couple of weeks. Then, early in April, he called Brenda from the prison and told her he would get out in a few days. He planned, said Gary, to take the bus that went through Marion to St. Louis, and from there connect with other buses to Denver and Salt Lake. Over the phone, he had a nice voice, soft spoken, twangy, held back. A lot of feeling in the center of it.


With all the excitement, Brenda was hardly taking into account that it was practically the same route their Mormon great-grandfather took when he jumped off from Missouri with a handcart near to a hundred years ago, and pushed west with all he owned over the prairies, and the passes of the Rockies, to come to rest at Provo in the Mormon Kingdom of Deseret just fifty miles below Salt Lake.





2


Gary couldn’t have traveled more than forty or fifty miles from Marion, however, before he phoned in from a rest stop to tell Brenda that the bus ride so far had been the most kidney-jogging experience he ever felt and he’d decided to cash in his ticket at St. Louis and come the rest of the way by plane. Brenda agreed. If Gary wanted to travel deluxe, well, he had a little coming.


He called her again that evening. He was definitely on the last flight and would phone once more when he arrived.

“Gary, it takes us forty-five minutes to get to the airport.”

“I don’t mind.”

Brenda thought this was a novel approach, but then he hadn’t been taking a lot of airplanes. Probably he wanted time to unwind.


Even the children were excited, and Brenda certainly couldn’t sleep. After midnight, she and Johnny just waited. Brenda had threatened to kill anybody who called her late—she wanted that line to be open.


“I’m here,” said his voice. It was 2 A.M.

“Okay, we’re coming to get you.”

“Right on,” said Gary and hung up. This was one guy who wouldn’t talk your ear off for a dime.


On the ride, Brenda kept telling John to hurry up. It was the middle of the night, and nobody was on the road. John, however, wasn’t about to get a ticket. They were traveling the Interstate, after all. So he kept at 60. Brenda gave up fighting. She was altogether too excited to fight.


“Oh, my God,” said Brenda, “I wonder how tall he is.”

“What?” said Johnny.


She had begun to think he might be short. That would be awful. Brenda was only five feet five, but it was a height she knew well. From the time she was ten years old, she had been 130 pounds, five-five, and wholly equipped with the same size bra as now—C cup.

“What do you mean, is he tall?” asked Johnny.

“I don’t know, I hope he is.”


In junior high, if she put on heels, the only person big enough to dance with her was the gym teacher. She used to hate like hell to kiss a boy on the forehead and tell him good night. In fact, she got so paranoid about being tall it could have stunted her growth.

It certainly made her like boys taller than herself. They let her feel feminine. She just had this nightmare that when they got to the airport, Gary would only come up to her armpit. Why, she would abandon the whole thing right there. Shift for yourself, she would tell him.


They pulled up to the island that ran parallel to the main entrance of the terminal building. So soon as she got out of the car, there was Johnny over on the driver’s side, trying to tuck his shirttail in. That annoyed Brenda no end.

She could see Gary leaning against the building. “There he is,” Brenda cried, but Johnny said, “Wait, I have to zip my pants.”

“Who gives a shit about your shirttail?” said Brenda. “I’m going.”


As she crossed the street between the parking island and the main door, Gary saw her and picked up his satchel. Pretty soon they were running toward each other. As they met, Gary dropped his bag, looked at her, then encircled her so hard she could have been hugged by a bear. Even Johnny had never gripped Brenda that hard.


When Gary put her down on the ground again, she stood back and looked at him. She had to take him all in. She said, “My God, you’re tall.”

He started to laugh. “What did you expect, a midget?”

“I don’t know what I expected,” she said, “but, thank God, you’re tall.”

Johnny was just standing there with his big good face going, um, um, um.


“Hey, coz,” said Gary, “it’s fine to see you.” He shook hands with Johnny.

“By the way, Gary,” said Brenda demurely, “this is my husband.”

Gary said, “I assumed that’s who it was.”


Johnny said, “Have you got everything with you?”

Gary picked up his flight bag—it was pathetically small, thought Brenda—and said, “This is it. This is all I have.” He said it without humor and without self-pity. Material things were obviously no big transaction to him.


Now she noticed his clothes. He had a black trench coat slung on his arm and was wearing a maroon blazer over—could you believe it?—a yellow and green striped shirt. Then a pair of beige polyester trousers that were badly hemmed. Plus a pair of black plastic shoes. She paid attention to people’s footwear because of her father’s trade and she thought, Wow, that’s really cheap. They didn’t even give him a pair of leather shoes to go home in.


“Come on,” said Gary, “let’s get the hell out of here.”

She could see then he’d had something to drink. He wasn’t plastered, but he sure was tipped. Made a point of putting his arm around her when they walked to the car.


When they got in, Brenda sat in the middle and Johnny drove. Gary said, “Hey, this is kind of a cute car. What is it?”

“A yellow Maverick,” she told him. “My little lemon.”


They drove. The first silence came in.


“Are you tired?” asked Brenda.

“A little tired, but then I’m a little drunk too.” Gary grinned. “I took advantage of the champagne flight. I don’t know if it was the altitude, or not having good liquor for a long time, but, boy, I got tore up on that plane. I was happier than hell.”

Brenda laughed. “I guess you’re entitled to be snockered.”


The prison sure cut his hair short. It would, Brenda judged, be heavy handsome brown hair when it grew out, but for now it stuck up hick style in the back. He kept pushing it down.

No matter, she liked his looks. In the half-light that came into the car as they drove through Salt Lake on the Interstate, the city sleeping on both sides of them, she decided that Gary was everything she expected in that department. A long, fine nose, good chin, thin well-shaped lips. He had character about his face.


“Want to go for a cup of coffee?” Johnny asked.

Brenda felt Gary tighten. It was as if even the thought of walking into a strange place got him edgy. “Come on,” Brenda said, “we’ll give the ten-cent tour.”


They picked Jean’s Cafe. It was the only place south of Salt Lake open at 3 A.M., but it was Friday night and people were sporting their finery. Once installed in their booth, Gary said, “I guess I got to get some clothes.”


Johnny encouraged him to eat, but he wasn’t hungry. Obviously too excited. Brenda felt as if she could pick up the quiver in each bright color that Gary was studying on the jukebox. He looked close to being dazzled by the revolving red, blue, and gold light show on the electronic screen of the cigarette console. He was so involved it drew her into his mood. When a couple of cute girls walked in, and Gary mumbled, “Not bad,” Brenda laughed. There was something so real about the way he said it.

Couples kept coming from parties and leaving, and the sound of cars parking and taking off didn’t stop. Still, Brenda was not looking at the door. Her best friend could have walked in, but she would have been all alone with Gary. She couldn’t remember when somebody had absorbed her attention this much. She didn’t mean to be rude to Johnny, but she did kind of forget he was there.


Gary, however, looked across the table and said, “Hey man, thanks. I appreciate how you went along with Brenda to get me out.” They shook hands again. This time Gary did it thumbs up.

Over the coffee, he asked Brenda about her folks, her sis, her kids, and Johnny’s job.


Johnny did maintenance at the Pacific State Cast Iron and Pipe. While he was blacksmithing now, he used to make iron pipe, fire it, cast it, sometimes do the mold work.

The conversation died. Gary had no clue what to ask Johnny next. He knows nothing about us, Brenda thought, and I know so little about his life.


Gary spoke of a couple of prison friends and what good men they were. Then he said apologetically, Well, you don’t want to hear about prison, it’s not very pleasant.


Johnny said they were only tiptoeing around because they didn’t want to offend him. “We’re curious,” said Johnny, “but, you know, we don’t want to ask: what’s it like in there? What do they do to you?”

Gary smiled. They were silent again.


Brenda knew she was making Gary nervous as hell. She kept staring at him constantly, but she couldn’t get enough of his face. There were so many corners in it.

“God,” she kept saying, “it’s good to have you here.”

“It’s good to get back.”

“Wait till you get to know this country,” she said. She was dying to tell him about the kind of fun they could have on Utah Lake, and the camper trips they would take in the canyons. The desert was just as gray and brown and grim as desert anywhere, but the mountains went up to twelve thousand feet, and the canyons were green with beautiful forests and super drinking parties with friends. They could teach him how to hunt with bow and arrow, she was about ready to tell him, when all of a sudden she got a good look at Gary in the light. Speak of all the staring she had done, it was as if she hadn’t studied him at all yet. Now she felt a strong sense of woe. He was marked up much more than she had expected.

She reached out to touch his cheek at the place where he had a very bad scar, and Gary said, “Nice looking, isn’t it?”

Brenda said, “I’m sorry, Gary, I didn’t mean to embarrass you.”


This set up such a pause that Johnny finally asked, “How’d it happen?”

“A guard hit me,” said Gary. He smiled. “They had me tied down for a shot of Prolixin—and I managed to spit in the doctor’s face. Then I got clobbered.”


“How,” asked Brenda, “would you like to take that guard who hit you, and get ahold of him?”

“Don’t pick my brain,” said Gary.

“Okay,” said Brenda, “but do you hate him?”

“God, yeah,” said Gary, “wouldn’t you?”

“Yeah, I would,” said Brenda. “Just checking.”


Half an hour later, driving home, they went by Point of the Mountain. Off to the left of the Interstate a long hill came out of the mountains and its ridge was like the limb of a beast whose paw just reached the highway. On the other side, in the desert to the right, was Utah State Prison. There were only a few lights in its buildings now. They made jokes about Utah State Prison.





3


Back in her living room, drinking beer, Gary began to unwind. He liked beer, he confessed. In prison, they knew how to make a watery brew out of bread. Called it Pruno. In fact, both Brenda and Johnny were observing that Gary could put brew away as fast as anyone they knew.


Johnny soon got tired and went to sleep. Now Gary and Brenda really began to talk. A few prison stories came out of him. To Brenda, each seemed wilder than the one before. Probably they were half true, half full of beer. He had to be reciting out of his hind end.


It was only when she looked out the window and saw the night was over that she realized how long they had been talking. They stepped through the door to look at the sun coming up over the back of her ranch house and all her neighbors’ ranch houses, and standing there, on her plot of lawn, in a heap of strewn-about toys, wet with cold spring dew, Gary looked at the sky and took a deep breath.

“I feel like jogging,” he said.

“You’ve got to be nuts, tired as you are,” she said.

He just stretched and breathed deep, and a big smile came over his face. “Hey, man,” he said, “I’m really out.”


In the mountains, the snow was iron gray and purple in the hollows, and glowed like gold on every slope that faced the sun. The clouds over the mountains were lifting with the light. Brenda took a good look into his eyes and felt full of sadness again. His eyes had the expression of rabbits she had flushed, scared-rabbit was the common expression, but she had looked into those eyes of scared rabbits and they were calm and tender and kind of curious. They did not know what would happen next.





Chapter 2


THE FIRST WEEK



1


Brenda put Gary on the foldout couch in the TV room. When she began to make the bed, he stood there smiling.

“What gives you that impish little grin?” she said after a pause.

“Do you know how long it’s been since I slept on a sheet?”

He took a blanket but no pillow. Then she went to her room. She never knew if he fell asleep. She had the feeling he lay down and rested and never took off his polyesters, just his shirt. When she got up a few hours later, he was up and around.


They were still having coffee when Toni came over to visit, and Gary gave her a big hug, and stood back, and framed her face with his hands and said, “I finally get to meet the kid sister. Man, I’ve looked at your photographs. What a foxy lady you are.”

“You’re going to make me blush,” said Toni.

She certainly looked like Brenda. Same popping black eyes, black hair, same sassy look. It was just that Brenda was on the voluptuous side and Toni was slim enough to model. Take your pick.

When they sat down, Gary kept reaching over and putting his arm around Toni, or taking hold of her hand. “I wish you weren’t my cousin,” he said, “and married to such a big tall dude.”


Later, Toni would tell Brenda how good and wise Howard had been for saying, “Go over and meet Gary without me.” She went on to describe how warm Gary made her feel, not sexy, but more like a brother. He had amazed her with how much he knew of her life. Like that Howard was six foot six. Brenda kept herself from remarking that he had not learned it from any letters Toni had written, since Toni had never written a line.


Before Brenda took Gary over to meet Vern and Ida, Johnny showed a test of strength. He took the bathroom scale and squeezed it between his hands until the needle went up to 250 pounds.

Gary tried and reached 120. He went crazy and squeezed the scales until he was shaking. The needle went to 150.

“Yeah,” said Johnny, “you’re improving.”

“What’s the highest you’ve gone?” asked Gary.

“Oh,” said Johnny, “the scale stops at 280, but I’ve taken it past there. I suppose 300.”


On the drive to the shoe shop, Brenda told Gary a little more about her father. Vern, she explained, might be the strongest man she knew.

Stronger than Johnny?

Well, Brenda explained, nobody could top Johnny at squeezing the scales, but she didn’t know who had ever beaten Vern Damico at arm wrestling.

Vern, said Brenda, was strong enough to be gentle all the time. “I don’t think my father ever gave me a spanking except once in my whole life and I truly asked for that. It was only one pat on the hind end, but that hand of his could cover your whole body.”


The mountains had been gold and purple at dawn, but now in the morning they were big and brown and bald and had gray rain-soaked snow on the ridges. It got into their mood. The distance from the north side of Orem where she lived, to Vern’s store in the center of Provo, was six miles, but going along State Street, it took a while. There were shopping malls and quick-eat palaces, used-car dealers, chain clothing stores and gas stops, appliance stores and highway signs and fruit stands. There were banks and real estate firms in one-story office compounds and rows of condominiums with sawed-off mansard roofs. There hardly seemed a building that was not painted in a nursery color: pastel yellow, pastel orange, pastel tan, pastel blue. Only a few faded two-story wooden houses looked as if they had been built even thirty years ago. On State Street, going the six miles from Orem to Provo, those houses looked as old as frontier saloons.

“It sure has changed,” said Gary.

Overhead was the immense blue of the strong sky of the American West. That had not changed.


At the foot of the mountains, on the boundary between Orem and Provo, was Brigham Young University. It was also new and looked like it had been built from prefabricated toy kits. Twenty years ago, BYU had a few thousand students. Now the enrollment was close to thirty thousand, Brenda told him. As Notre Dame to good Catholics, so BYU to good Mormons.





2


“I better tell you a little more about Vern,” Brenda said. “You have to understand when Dad is joking and when he is not. That can be a little hard to figure out because Dad does not always smile when he is joking.”


She did not tell him that her father had been born with a harelip, but then she assumed he knew. Vern had a full palate so his speech was not affected, but the mark was right out there. His mustache didn’t pretend to hide it. When he first went to school it didn’t take him long to become one of the toughest kids. Any boy who wanted to kid Vern about his lip, said Brenda, got a belt in the snout.


It made Vern’s personality. To this day, when children came into the shoe shop and saw him for the first time, Vern did not have to hear what the child was saying when the mother said, Hush. He was used to that. It didn’t bother him now. Over the years, however, he had had to do a lot to overcome it. Not only did it leave him strong, but frank. He might be gentle in his manner, Brenda said, but he usually came out and said what he thought. That could be abrasive.


Yet when Gary met Vern, Brenda decided she had prepared him too much. He was a little nervous when he said hello, and looked around, and acted surprised at the size of the shoe shop, as if he hadn’t expected a big cave of a place. Vern commented that it was a lot of room to walk around in when customers weren’t there, and they got on from that to his osteoarthritis. Vern had a powerfully painful accumulation in his knee that had frozen the joint. Just hearing about it seemed to get Gary concerned. It didn’t seem phony, Brenda thought. She could almost feel the pain of Vern’s knee pass right into Gary’s scrotum.


Vern thought Gary ought to move in with Ida and himself right away, but shouldn’t plan to go to work for a few days. A fellow needed time to get acquainted with his freedom, Vern observed. After all, Gary had come into a strange town, didn’t know where the library was, didn’t know where to buy a cup of coffee. So he talked to Gary real slow. Brenda was accustomed to men taking quite a while to say anything to each other, but if you were impatient, it could drive you crazy.


When she and Gary went over to the house, however, Ida was thrilled. “Bessie was my special big sister, and I was always her favorite,” Ida told him. She was getting a little plump, but with her red-brown hair and her bright-colored dress, Ida looked like an attractive gypsy lady.

She and Gary began talking right away about how when he was a little boy, he used to visit Grandma and Grandpa Brown. “I loved them days,” Gary said to her. “I was as happy then as I’ve ever been in my life.”


Together, Gary and Ida made a sight in that small living room. Although Vern’s shoulders could fill a doorway, and any one of his fingers was as wide as anyone else’s two fingers, he was not that tall, and Ida was short. They wouldn’t be bothered by a low ceiling.


It was a living room with a lot of stuffed furniture in bright autumn colors and bright rugs and color-filled pictures in gold frames and there was a ceramic statue of a black stable boy with a red jacket standing by the fireplace. Chinese end tables and big colored hassocks took up space on the floor.


Having lived among steel bars, reinforced concrete, and cement-block walls, Gary would now be spending a lot of his time in this living room.


Back at her house, on the pretext of helping him pack, Brenda got a peek at the contents of his tote bag. It held a can of shaving cream, a razor, a toothbrush, a comb, some snapshots, his parole papers, a few letters, and no change of underwear.


Vern slipped him some underclothes, some tan slacks, a shirt, and twenty bucks.

Gary said, “I can’t pay you back right now.”

“I’m giving you the money,” Vern said. “If you need more, see me. I don’t have a lot, but I’ll give you what I can.”

Brenda would have understood her father’s reasoning: a man without money in his pocket can get into trouble.


Sunday afternoon, Vern and Ida drove him over to Lehi, on the other side of Orem, for a visit with Toni and Howard.

Both of Toni’s daughters, Annette and Angela, were excited about Gary. He was like a magnet with kids, Brenda and Toni agreed. On this Sunday, two days out of jail, he sat in a gold cloth-upholstered chair drawing chalk pictures on a blackboard for Angela.

He’d draw a beautiful picture and Angela, who was six, would erase it. He got the biggest kick out of that. He would take pains on the next one, draw it extra-beautiful, and she’d go. Yeah, uh-huh, and she’d erase it. So he could do another one.


After a while he sat down on the floor and played cards with her.

The only game Angela knew was Fish, but she couldn’t remember how to say each number. She would speak of 6 as an upper because the line went up, and 9 was a downer. A 7 was a hooker. That tickled Gary. Queens, Angela said firmly, were ladies. Kings were big boys. Jacks were little boys.

He called: “Toni, would you explain something? Am I playing some illicit game here with your daughter?” Gary thought it was very funny.


Later that Sunday, Howard Gurney and Gary tried to talk to each other. Howard had been a construction worker all his life, a union electrician. He’d never been in jail except for one night when he was a kid. It was difficult to find much common denominator. Gary knew a lot, and had a fantastic vocabulary, but he and Howard didn’t seem to have any experiences in common.





3


Monday morning, Gary broke the twenty-dollar bill Vern had given him, and bought a pair of gym shoes. That week, he would wake up every day around six, and go out to run. He would take off from Vern’s house in a fast long stride down to Fifth West, go around the park, and back—more than ten blocks in four minutes, good time. Vern, with his bad knee, thought Gary was a fantastic runner.

In the beginning, Gary didn’t know exactly what he could do in the house. On his first evening alone with Vern and Ida, he asked if he could get a glass of water.

“This is your home,” Vern said. “You don’t have to ask permission.”

Gary came back from the kitchen with the glass in his hand. “I’m beginning to get onto this,” he said to Vern. “It’s pretty good.”

“Yeah,” said Vern, “come and go as you want. Within reason.”


Gary didn’t like television. Maybe he’d seen too much in prison, but in the evening, once Vern went to bed. Gary and Ida would sit and talk.

Ida reminisced about Bessie’s skill with makeup. “She was so clever that way,” said Ida, “and so tasteful. She knew how to make herself look beautiful all the time. She had the same elegance about her as our mother who is French and always had aristocratic traits.” Her mother, said Ida, had a breeding that she gave to her children. The table was always set properly, not to the stiffest standards—they were just poor Mormons—but a tablecloth, always a tablecloth, and enough silverware to do the job.


Bessie, Gary told Ida, was now so arthritic she could hardly move, and the little trailer in which she lived was all plastic. Considering the climate in Portland, that trailer had to be damp. When he got a little money together, he would try to improve matters. One night Gary actually called his mother and talked for a long time. Ida heard him say he loved her and was going to bring her back to Provo to live.

It was a warm week for April, and pleasant talking through the evenings, planning for the summer to come.

About the third night, they got to talking about Vern’s driveway. It wasn’t wide enough to take more than one car, but Vern had a strip of lawn beside it that could offer space for another car provided he could remove the concrete curb that separated the grass from the paving. That curb ran for thirty-five feet from the sidewalk to the garage. It was about six inches high, eight inches wide, and would take a lot of work to be chopped out. Because of his bad leg, Vern had been holding off.

“I’ll do it,” said Gary.


Sure enough, next morning at 6 A.M., Vern was awakened by the sound of Gary taking a sledgehammer to the job. Sound slammed through the neighborhood in the dawn. Vern winced for the people in the City Center Motel, next door, who would be awakened by the reverberation. All day Gary worked, cracking the curbing with overhead blows, then prying chunks out, inch by inch, with the crowbar. Before long, Vern had to buy a new one.


Those thirty-five feet of curbing took one day and part of the next. Vern offered to help but Gary wouldn’t allow it. “I know a lot about pounding rocks,” he told Vern with a grin.

“What can I do for you?” asked Vern.

“Well, it’s thirsty work,” said Gary. “Just keep me in beer.”

It went like that. He drank a lot of beer and worked real hard and they were happy with the job. When he was done, he had open blisters on his hand as large as Vern’s fingernails. Ida insisted on bandaging his palms, but Gary was acting like a kid—a man don’t wear bandages—and took them off real quick.


Doing the work, however, had loosened him up. He was ready to do his first exploring around town.


Provo was laid out in a checkerboard. It had very wide streets and a few buildings that were four stories high. It had three movie theaters. Two were on Center Street, the main shopping street, and the other was on University Avenue, the other shopping street. In Provo, the equivalent of Times Square was where the two streets crossed. There was a park next to a church on one corner and diagonally across was an extra-large drugstore.


During the day, Gary would walk around town. If he came by the shoe shop around lunchtime. Vern would take him to the Provo Cafe, or to Joe’s Spic and Span which had the best coffee in town. It was just a box of a joint with twenty seats. At lunchtime, however, people would be waiting on the street to get in. Of course, Vern told him, Provo was not famous for restaurants.

“What is it famous for?” asked Gary.

“Darned if I know,” said Vern. “Maybe it’s the low crime rate.”


Once Gary started in the shoe shop, he would be making $2.50 an hour. A couple of times after lunch he hung around to get the feel of it. After watching Vern wait on a few people, Gary decided he’d like to concentrate on repair work. Didn’t know if he could handle rude customers. “I’m going to have to sneak up on that,” he told Vern.


Looking around, Gary decided to get out of his polyesters and buy some Levi’s. He borrowed a few more bucks from Vern, and Brenda took him to a shopping mall.

He told her that he had never been to anything like this before. It was mind-stopping. He couldn’t keep his eyes off the girls. Right in the middle of goggling at them, Gary walked into the ledge of a fountain. If Brenda hadn’t grabbed his sleeve, he’d have been in. “You certainly haven’t lost your eye,” she told him. He had only been gawking at the most beautiful girls. He was nearly all wet, but he had very good taste.


In the Levi’s department at Penney’s, Gary just stood there. After a while, he said, “Hey, I don’t know how to go about this. Are you supposed to take the pants off the shelf, or does somebody issue them to you?”

Brenda really felt sorry for him. “Find the ones you want,” she said, “and tell the clerk. If you want to try them on, you can.”

“Without paying for them?”

“Oh, yeah, you can try them on first,” she said.





4


Gary’s first working day in the shop was good. He was enthusiastic and Vern was not displeased. “Look,” Gary said, “I don’t know anything about this, but tell me and I’ll catch on.”

Vern started him on a bench jack, tearing down shoes. The jack was like a metal foot upside down, and Gary would put the shoe on, pry off the sole, take off the heel, remove the nails, pull out the stitching, and generally prepare the top for the new sole and heels. You had to watch not to rip the leather or make a mess for the next man.

Gary was slow, but he did it well. The first few days he had an excellent attitude, humble, pleasant, nice fellow. Vern was getting to like him.


The trouble was to keep him busy. Vern wasn’t always able to be teaching. There were rush jobs to get out. The real difficulty was that Vern, and his assistant, Sterling Baker, were used to moving the work between them. It was easier to do it themselves than show a new man how to accomplish something. So Gary had to wait when he really wanted to move on to the next step. If he took a heel off, he wanted to put the new one on. Sometimes twenty minutes would go by before Vern could get back.

Gary would say, “I don’t like this standing around and waiting. I feel like a dummy, you know.”

The problem, as Vern saw it, was that Gary wanted perfection quickly. Wanted to be able to fix a pair of shoes like Vern could. It just wasn’t going to come that way. Vern told him, “You can’t learn this immediately.”

Gary took it fine. “Well, I know that,” he said, but his impatience didn’t take long to come back.


Of course, Gary did get on well with Sterling Baker who was about twenty, and the nicest fellow. He didn’t raise his voice, had nice looks, and didn’t mind talking about shoes. The first couple of days he was there, Gary kept bringing the conversation back to footwear as if he was going to learn everything there was about it. The only time Gary had trouble concentrating was when pretty girls came into the store. “Look at that,” he’d say. “I haven’t seen anything like that for years.”


The girls he liked best, he said, were around twenty. It occurred to Vern that Gary wasn’t much older when he said good-bye to the world for thirteen years. He certainly was comfortable becoming friends with a kid like Sterling Baker.


Still, Gary’s first date was set up by Vern and Ida with a divorced woman near his own age. Lu Ann Price. When she heard, Brenda said to Johnny, “This has got to be good.”





5


Brenda didn’t see Lu Ann as a feasible date for Gary. She was skinny, she had a few kids, and she was awful sure of herself. Her eyes had pink lids. That was a piss-poor combination.

All the same, she was a redhead. Maybe Gary would go for that.


The Damicos had decided Lu Ann was worth a try. There was nobody else they could think of right now, and Lu Ann, after all, had heard a little about Gary after Brenda picked up her correspondence with him again. When she heard that Gary didn’t know how to meet people and could hardly take care of himself, Lu Ann felt ready to befriend him. “Why not,” she said. “He’s lonely. He’s paid a terrible debt.” Maybe a friend could explain things that a family couldn’t.


On Thursday evening, therefore, not a week from last Friday night when Gary had been flying from St. Louis to Salt Lake, Lu Ann called to ask Vern if Gary would like to go out with her for a cup of coffee.

“I think that’s a super idea,” said Vern. Gary, being called to the phone, was quick to say yes.


About nine, she came over. Gary looked stunned when he met her. It was as if he hadn’t expected her to look like that. Still, as Lu Ann would tell friends later, she couldn’t decide whether he was pleased or disappointed. He stammered while saying hello, and then sat in a chair across the room from her.


He had on a pair of old-fashioned slacks that were not only too short, but without wide bottoms. He wore a jacket that looked like it’d been borrowed from Vern, big in the chest, hiked up at the hips. All the same, he was overdressed for Lu Ann who, on this warm night, was in Levi’s and a peasant blouse.


Since he stayed silent in his chair, Vern and Lu Ann kept talking until it got like work. “Gary, do you want to go out for that cup of coffee or stay here?” she asked at last.

“Let’s go,” he said. He went to his room, however, to emerge with a fisherman’s hat that Vern used to wear as a joke. It was red, white and blue with stars all over it. Vern had given it to him after Gary said he liked it. Now he wore it everywhere. “How do you like the hat?” he would ask Vern.

“Well,” Vern would reply, “it don’t do anything for you.”

Lu Ann thought it contrasted abominably with his other clothes.


When they walked out to her car, he neglected to open the door for her. Soon as she asked if he had a particular place in mind for coffee, he winced. “I’d rather have a beer,” he said.

Lu Ann took him to Fred’s Lounge. She knew the people who ran it and so was sure nobody would hassle him. The way he was dressed, it would not be hard to get into trouble in a strange place. One difficulty was that there were no nice cocktail lounges around. Mormons didn’t see any reason for public drinking to take place in agreeable surroundings. If you wanted a beer, you had to get it in a dive. For every car parked outside a bar in Provo or Orem were three or four motorcycles.


At Fred’s Lounge, Gary kept looking around the room. His eyes didn’t seem able to take in enough.

When the bartender came up, Lu Ann said, “Gary, you have a choice.” He looked bewildered. The bartender was a lady, a nice meaty well-set-up lady.

After a little thought, he said, “I want a beer.”


Lu Ann said, “You have a choice of beers.”

He picked Coors. Lu Ann told Gary what it would cost and he handed over the money. When the bartender brought the change, he looked pleased with himself, as if he’d accomplished a tricky transaction.


He turned around in his seat and started watching the pool table. One by one, he examined the pictures on the wall, and the mirrors, and the little sayings tacked up behind the bar. Although he wanted nothing to eat, he studied the white inserted letters in the dark gray menu-board on the wall. He was taking in the place with the same intensity you would use in a game if you had to memorize the objects in a picture.

Lu Ann said, “Haven’t been in a bar lately, have you, Gary?”

“Not since I got out.”


The place was practically empty. A couple of people were rolling dice with the lady bartender. Lu Ann explained that the loser paid for the music on the jukebox.

Gary said, “Can I play?” Lu Ann said, “Sure you can.” He said, “Will you help me?” She said, “Yes, I will.”

They called for the cup, and Gary asked, “Did I win?” Lu Ann said, “Well, I’m afraid you lost this time.” He said, “How much do I put in?” She said, “Fifty cents.” Gary said, “Will you help me pick out the selections?”


Making their way through the beers, Lu Ann began to talk about herself. She didn’t always have red hair, she told him. Used to be a blond, and before that, had tried different shades, a little brown, ash blond, honey blond. Just yuck, she described it. She had settled on red because it suited her temperament. Lu Ann happened to have been, she explained, a honey blond just at the time her first daughter was born with red hair. She soon got tired of people asking how the baby came out that way. So even though her husband objected, she thought she’d try the bright red herself. Talk of a turnabout, she didn’t like it, but he did. So she kept it. She had now kept it so many years she would say, “Being a redhead is being me.”


She was a Utah girl, she said, and had been bounced back and forth. Her parents moved around the state a lot. When her husband, whom she dated through high school, went into the Navy, she hit both coasts with him: California and Florida. That was her life until she got divorced.


Now, she was back in Utah County again. The desert was at the end of every street, she said, except to the east. There, was the Interstate, and after that, the mountains. That was about it.

She would admit to being curious about his life. “What’s it like in prison?” she asked. “What do you have to do to survive?”

Gary said, “I got myself put into Solitary as much as I could so they would leave me alone.”


When they were ready to go, Gary asked, “Can I have a six-pack to take home?” She said, “If you want it.” Gary said, “Is it all right to drink my beer in your car?” She said yes.


Gary wanted to know why she’d come out to meet him. She said it was simple: he needed a friend and she needed a new friend. That did not satisfy him. He said, “When somebody in prison offers friendship, they want something for it.”


As they drove, he kept staring at the road ahead. Once he looked up and said, “Do you normally do that—just drive around?”

“Yes, I do,” Lu Ann told him, “it relaxes me.”

“It doesn’t bother you?” he asked. “No,” she said, “it doesn’t bother me in the least.”


They kept driving. Suddenly he turned to her and said, “Will you go to a motel with me?”


Lu Ann said, “No.”


“No,” Lu Ann told him, “I’m here to be your friend.” She said as forcefully as she could, “If the other is what you want, you better go look someplace else.”

He said, “I’m sorry, but I haven’t been around a girl.” He kept staring at the dashboard. After a silence that went on for a couple of minutes, he said, “Everybody’s got something, but I’ve got nothing.”

Lu Ann answered, “We all have to earn it, Gary.”

He said, “I don’t want to hear any of that.”

She pulled over. “We’ve been talking,” she told him, “but not face to face. I want you to listen to me.” She said that all her friends had all worked superhard to have their homes, their cars, their children.

“You,” he said, “all had it easy.”

She said, “Gary, you can’t expect everything to be handed to you the minute you walk out the prison door. I’m a working girl,” she told him, “Brenda works hard at home. She has her kids and husband to take care of. Don’t you think she’s earned all that?”


He was fidgeting as she spoke. At that point he said, “I’m a guest in this car.”

Lu Ann replied, “Yes, you’re in my car, but you’re not going anywhere, unless you’re going on foot.” She had the feeling he would get out at this point if he knew where he was.

Gary said, “I don’t want to hear any more.”

“Well, you’re going to.”

Suddenly, he raised his fist.


She said, “You want to hit me?” She didn’t really think he would. Still, she felt his rage pass over her like a blast of air.


Lu Ann leaned forward and said, “I can hear that switch on the side of your head going click. Gary, turn it back on, and listen to me. I offer you friendship.”

“Let’s drive home,” he said.

She took him back to Vern’s and they sat outside in the car. Gary asked if he could hug her. Asked as if he needed a favor. “I’m friendly with a lot of people,” Lu Ann said, “but I offer my friendship to very few.” He shifted in the seat and put his arms around her and pulled her close. He hugged her very hard. He said, “It’s different than I thought it would be.”


She felt that he was grabbing at everything. It was as if the world was just out of reach of his fingers. She said, “Don’t rush so, Gary. You’ve got time. You’ve got so much time.” He said, “I haven’t. I’ve lost it. I can’t make those years up.”

“Well,” she told him, “maybe you can’t, but you have to put it behind you. If you take one step at a time, you’ll find yourself a woman, and some kids. You can still have it all.”


“You’re not going to see me again, are you?” he asked.

She said, “Yes, I will, if you want me to.”

He kissed her, but it was forced. Then he pushed her away and held her by the shoulders and looked at her, one hand on each shoulder.

He said, “I’m sorry. I’ve messed this up, haven’t I?”


She said, “No, you haven’t, Gary. I’ll see you again.” She took a little church key they had been using to open their beers that evening, and now gave it to him and he thanked her. Lu Ann said, “If you need someone to talk to, my phone is open 24 hours a day, Gary.”

He got out of the car and said, “I’m sorry. I’ve muffed it all.” Added, “Vern’s going to be awful mad at me.”





6


Vern, in fact, was up when Gary came through the door, and they talked about the evening. It was Vern’s impression that Gary might have been too forceful.

“You just don’t,” Vern explained, “try to do everything the first time on a date. You find out about each other.”


Gary started hitting on the beer in the refrigerator. Vern didn’t have to be told Gary had been through a few already.

“Gary,” Vern said, “are you going to shape up, or am I going to have to knock you on your ass?”


“What are you going to do?” asked Gary.

“I’m going to have to do it.”

“Aren’t you afraid of me?” Gary asked.

“No,” said Vern, “why should I be?” In his gentlest voice, he said, “I can whip you.”


Gary’s face lit up as if for the first time he felt like they wanted him in this house.

“Aren’t you afraid?” he asked again.

“No,” said Vern, “I’m not. I hope that doesn’t sound crazy.”

They both began to laugh.


Gary looked around the room and said to Vern, “This is what I want.”

“Yeah,” said Vern, “what do you want?”

“Well, I want a home,” said Gary. “I want a family. I want to live like other people live.”

Vern said, “You can’t have that in five minutes. You can’t have it in a year. You’ve got to work for it.”


Gary tried to call Lu Ann in the morning, but she wasn’t there, and left a message.

By the time Lu Ann called the shop, he was out.

Sterling Baker took the call. Gary, he told her, had gone up the road to some bar.

“Oh, Sterling,” said Lu Ann, “please explain to him that I’m his friend. I really wasn’t here when he called. But I did try to get back to him.”

Sterling said he’d tell Gary. Lu Ann never did hear from him.


Gary returned to the shop for a couple of hours and seemed sober. It was payday, but Vern had advanced him money, so there wasn’t anything due. When Gary said he was short, however, Vern slipped him a ten, and said, “Gary, if you don’t think this job is going to be right for you, let me know. We’ll find something else.”





7


Gary was invited to dinner that night at Sterling Baker’s house. He made quite an impression on Sterling’s wife, Ruth Ann, by playing with the baby for a long while. Since he liked the music on the radio, he bounced the baby in time to Country-and-Western. Johnny Cash, it came out in conversation, was his all-time favorite. One time he got out of jail and spent an entire day listening to nothing but Johnny Cash records.


How long had he been in prison altogether? Ruth Ann wanted to know. She was small and had long hair that was so light she looked like a natural platinum blond. If she had been a boy, they would have called her Whitey.

Well, Gary told them, if you added it up, he guessed he’d been in, on and off, eighteen of his last twenty-two years. He’d been on ice, and now he’d come out, and he still felt young. Sterling Baker felt sorry for him.


Over dinner, Gary told stories about prison. Back in ’68, he had been in some prison riots, and a local TV crew selected him as one of the leaders and had him on television saying a few words. His looks, or something in the way he spoke, attracted attention. He got some mail out of it including a beautiful correspondence with this girl named Becky. He fell in love with her through her letters. Then she came to visit. She was so fat that she had to waddle through the door sideways. Yet he still liked her enough to want to marry her.


It was not uncommon, Gary said. You could always see fat women in the visiting room of a jail. For some reason, very fat women and convicts got along. “Once you get behind bars,” Gary remarked, “maybe you need more of an earth mother.”


They were going to get married but Becky had to go into the hospital for an operation. She died on the table. That was his prison romance.


He had other stories. LeRoy Earp, who had been one of his best friends as a kid, was sent to Oregon State Penitentiary two years after Gary. LeRoy had killed a woman, picked up a life sentence and didn’t have much to look forward to. So he had a bad habit. LeRoy, Gary explained, would stay fucked-up on Valium for months.

“He got in debt to this guy named Bill, who was dealing in prison dope,” said Gary, looking at Sterling and Ruth Ann, “and Bill was always fucking with people. One time LeRoy sent word to me, Bill had come to his cell and beat him up, all that shit,” said Gary, “put the boots to him while LeRoy was on the floor. Then Bill walked off with LeRoy’s outfit, you know, his syringe and needle, his money, everything.” Gary took down half a can of beer at a swallow. “Well,” he said, “Valium can make you hallucinate, so I wasn’t certain LeRoy’s story was true. I talked it over with a guy who was going in the hole for seven days and he checked it out for me, confirmed it. The guy wanted to know if I needed any help with Bill.

“I told him I would do it myself. LeRoy was my personal friend. The prison was doing some construction out in the yard, so I went over, stole a hammer and caught Bill watching a football game on TV, I bounced the hammer off his head. Then I turned around and walked off.” Gary nodded, studying their reactions. “They took Bill up to Portland for brain surgery. He was pretty fucked-up.”

“What happened to you?” asked Ruth Ann.

“There was two or three snitches in the TV room and they saw me do it and told the Warden. But the snitches were afraid to stand up in Court. So the Warden just kept me in the hole for four months. When I got out, this buddy of mine gave me a little toy hammer to wear on a chain, and nicknamed me Hammersmith.”

Gary told this story in a Texas accent, very even voice. He was kind of informing Sterling that he had a code. It went: Be loyal to your friends.


Gary now asked Ruth Ann if she knew any girls who would go out with him.

She didn’t, offhand.





Chapter 3


THE FIRST MONTH



1


Gary went back to visit with Brenda and Johnny for Easter weekend. After the kids went to sleep, they spent Saturday night coloring Easter eggs around the table, and Gary had a fine time and drew beautiful pictures and wrote the names of the kids in Gothic script, and in three-dimensional letters so that, small as they were on the Easter egg, they still appeared to be cut out of stone.


After a while, Johnny and Gary began to giggle together. They were still painting eggs, but instead of saying, “Cristie, I love you,” or “Keep it up, Nick,” they were printing stuff like “Fuck the Easter Bunny.” Brenda exclaimed, “You can’t hide those.”

“Well,” said Gary with a big grin, “guess we got to eat ’em.” He and Johnny had a feast of mislabeled hard-boiled eggs.


They spent the rest of the evening drawing maps—Take so many steps; Look under a rock; You can read the next clue only in a mirror; etc.—they were up half the night putting candy, eggs and treats all over the yard.


Brenda had a good time watching Gary climb around in the tree—which was wet for that matter. They were having a wet Easter. Here he was looming through the branches, hiding goodies, and getting soaked right through.

Then he put jelly beans all over his room, especially on the shelf above his couch, so that when the kids got up next morning, they would have to romp over him to get the candies.


Little Tony, who was only four, walked across the front of Gary’s chest, up on his face, mashed his nose, and slipped off, squashing his ear. Gary was laughing his head off.

The morning went like that. It was a good morning. When it cleared up a little, they played horseshoes and Johnny and Gary got along fine.


In the kitchen, Brenda said to him, “Hey, Gary, you see this Revere Ware pan? Your mother gave it to me.”

“Oh?”

“Yes,” Brenda told him, “it was a wedding gift when I first got married.”

Gary said, “Boy, that thing ought to be beat up by now.”

Brenda said, “Don’t get funny.”


It seemed the moment for Brenda to ask Gary if he’d been to see Mont Court. Gary said he had.

“Did you like him?”

“Yeah,” he said, “pretty good egg.”

“Gary,” Brenda said, “you work with him and he’ll work back with you.”

Gary gave a smile. He said a lot of men had been put in charge over him. People who worked in prison, and people who worked for the prison system. He didn’t really know anyone who’d been particularly willing to work with him.


Dinner didn’t turn out as Brenda had hoped. She’d invited Vern and Ida, and Howard and Toni with their kids, and of course she and Johnny had their own brood present including Johnny’s son, Kenny, by a previous marriage. Counting all the noses, they came to thirteen, and they made jokes about that. The main dish was spaghetti Italian style, promised to Gary the way Brenda’s Sicilian grandfather used to make it, with mushrooms and peppers and onions and oregano and garlic bread. She had some hot cross buns for dessert with a white X of icing on the top and plenty of coffee, and would have enjoyed the meal if it hadn’t been for how tense Gary looked.


Everybody was jabbering back and forth. It was not a quiet meal, but Gary was a little out of it. Occasionally, somebody would ask a polite question of him, or he would say something like, “Boy, this is better grub than what they had at Marion,” but kept his head down as he ate, and hid his silence by swallowing food in a hurry.

Brenda came to the glum conclusion that Gary was an atrocious eater. Too bad. Table manners were one of her hang-ups. She couldn’t stand to see a man shoveling and slobbering at the table.


From his letters she had expected him to be very much of a gentleman. Now she decided she should have known his manners would be common. In prison, they didn’t eat with napkins and place settings. Still, it got to her. Gary had long artist’s fingers, small at the tips, nice-looking hands like a pianist might have, but he gripped his fork with his fist and bulldozed it in.


He was, however, sitting at the end of the table by the refrigerator and so the fluorescent light over the sink was shining on his face. It lit up his eyes. Brenda said, “Wow, you’ve got the bluest eyes I’ve ever seen.”

He didn’t like that very well. He said, “They’re green.”

Brenda looked him back, “They’re not green, they’re blue.”

This went back and forth. Finally, Brenda said, “Okay, when you’re mad, they’re green; when you’re not, they’re blue. Right now, they’re blue. Do you feel blue?”

Gary said, “Shut up and eat.”


After Vern and Ida and Howard and Toni and the children left, and Johnny had gone to sleep, Brenda sat around with Gary having a cup of coffee. “Did you have a good time?” she asked.

“Oh, yeah,” said Gary. Then he shrugged, “I felt out of place. I have nothing to talk about.”

She said, “Boy, I wish we could get over that hump.”

“Come on,” he said, “who wants to hear about prison?”

Brenda said, “I’m just afraid of bringing back bad memories. Would you rather we didn’t walk so lightly around the subject?”

Gary said, “Yeah.”


He told her a couple of prison stories. God, they were crude. Gary could tell an awfully gross story. It seems there was this old boy Skeezix, who could perform fellatio on himself. He was proud of that. Nobody else in OSP could.

“OSP?” asked Brenda.

“Oregon State Penitentiary.”

Gary had taken a small cardboard box, painted it black, and put a tiny hole in it so it looked as if it were one of those lensless pinpoint cameras. He told Skeezix he had film in the box, and it would take a picture through the pinhole. Everybody gathered around to watch Gary take a picture of the fellow going down on himself. Skeezix was so dumb he was still waiting for the photo to come back.


On finishing his story, Gary went off laughing so hard, Brenda thought he’d sling his spaghetti around the room. She was awful glad when he wheezed into silence and fixed her with his eye as if to say, “Now, do you see my conversational problem?”





2


Rikki Baker was one of the regulars in Sterling Baker’s poker sessions. Although not heavy for his size, he was tall, very tall, maybe six-five. Gary fixed on him early. He was the only fellow in the game taller than Gary. They kind of got along.


Rikki was Sterling’s cousin, and had heard about Gary before he even got out of Marion. Although Rikki had been trained by the Navy to be a diesel mechanic, he didn’t get enough experience to qualify for a real job when he got out, and so had to take what came along in the way of day labor or construction. When nothing else was available, Rikki put in time at Vern’s shop and Sterling taught him leather work. So Rikki happened to be around when Vern was speaking about this nephew in prison who was getting out soon. Later, Rikki met Gary at the shop, but the guy only seemed like a new worker, uncertain of himself, that’s all. It was only when he saw him playing cards that he realized Gary was one hell of a relative.

Sure had a different personality at poker than he did in the shop. Rikki could see right off that Gary wasn’t too honest. He had a lot of habits that were just bad manners. Like he would lean over to see what a fellow had in his hand, and was a real lawyer about rules, always interpreting them in his favor. He also kept putting down the other players because they didn’t know the poker rules that convicts used. Since it was ten-cent ante, quarter raise, a pot could go to $10.00. Gary’s interest in poker was obviously the money. He was making no friends.

After that evening, a couple of Sterling’s buddies said they were going to stop coming over. Sterling told them, Fine with me. He was certainly being loyal to Gary. Yet when Rikki was alone with him, Sterling started to put Gary down. Rikki went along. There wasn’t too much they would take from him, they agreed. Still, Rikki had a funny feeling about the man. Didn’t want to make an enemy of him for too little. He figured if Gary gave trouble, he wouldn’t be afraid to just right-out fight him, but he was a little uneasy of what Gary might pull from his pocket.

They agreed, however, that they also felt sorry for him. Gary had a problem. No patience.


The poker games continued. Different people. By the third night, Sterling got Rikki aside and asked if he would take Gary somewhere. The guy was really getting on everybody’s nerves.

So Rikki asked if he wanted to chase down some girls. Gary said Yeah.

Rikki soon decided this was the horniest guy he had ever met. He was crazy.


Rikki had split up with his wife again. He had been with Sue for six years ever since he was 17 and she was 15. They had three kids, and they knew how to fight. So Rikki now started to kid Gary. Told him how beautiful Sue was, big beautiful mean-looking blond yet a nice chick. Now that she was mad at her husband, maybe she’d like to meet Gary.

In fact, Rikki had been so mad at her the last time he left that he took all the money in the house plus the food stamps and the welfare check. It would put her out of her mind for sure if he was to send over a steamed-up dude like Gary. So Rikki had said it, kind of half joking.


Once the possibility was there, though, Gary wouldn’t quit bugging Rikki about it. Rikki told him he had only meant it as a joke, it was his wife, man! But Gary kept asking when Rikki would take him over to Sue’s house. When Rikki finally told him, No way, Gary got so mad they almost did have a fight. Rikki had to get Gary off the subject by saying they could go drag Center Street. Rikki was pretty good at chasing girls, he let Gary know.


So they went up and down in Rikki Baker’s GTO. Would pass girls cruising in their cars and try to wave them over, then circle around and go down Center Street again, see the same girls, try to wave them over a second time, just driving side by side in traffic, part of a long line of other dudes in their cars, and pickup trucks, and the chicks in theirs, everybody’s radio going real loud.


Gary got bored with the lack of positive results. When they came to a red light behind one carful of girls who’d been teasing them, he jumped out and stuck his head in their window. Rikki couldn’t hear what he was saying, but when the light turned green and the girls tried to take off, Gary wouldn’t get his head out of their window. Didn’t care about the cars stuck behind, or anything. After the girls finally got going, Gary wanted Rikki to chase them down. “Ain’t no way,” said Rikki.

“Do it!”

With all the traffic, Rikki couldn’t catch up. All the while, Gary was yelling to make a move and show he was as good as he said.


They had started too late in the evening, however. There were a lot of cars with guys but only a few with girls, and they were just fooling around and very cautious. One had to come up on them easy, not scare them right out of the water. Gary made him promise to go out earlier next time.


As they were saying good night, Gary had a proposition. What would Rikki think about teaming up? Make a little money at poker.


Rikki had already heard about this from Sterling. He gave Gary the same answer Sterling had given: “Well, Gary, I couldn’t cheat against my friends,” he said.


For reply, Gary said, “Can I drive your car?” Being a GTO, it was a fast automobile. This time, he said yes. Figured he’d better. Not getting his way, bent Gary too far out of shape.


The moment he got the wheel, he almost killed them. Took a corner fast and nearly hit a stop sign. Then he didn’t slow down at the intersection and went cata-humping over the drainage ditch that was there to slow you down. Next he almost ran some people off the road, in fact, one car coming toward them had to go onto the shoulder. Rikki kept yelling at him to stop. It felt like an hour with a madman. Gary kept telling him all the while that it was not bad considering how long it had been since he drove, and Rikki was near to having a heart attack. Couldn’t get him to stop until Gary popped the clutch without enough gas and the motor conked. Then he couldn’t get it started. The GTO had a bad battery.

That’s what it took for Rikki to get behind the wheel again. Gary was awful depressed the battery had died on him. Got upset about it the way people can brood over bad weather.





3


Next day around lunchtime, Toni and Brenda picked Gary up at the shoe shop and took him out for a hamburger. Sitting on each side of him at the counter, talking into his left ear and his right ear, they got right to the topic. What it came down to was that he had been borrowing too much money.


Yes, said Toni gently, he’d been hitting Vern for a five-dollar bill here, ten there, once in a while twenty. He hadn’t been going to work a full number of hours either. “Vern and Ida said this to you?” Gary asked.


“Gary,” said Toni, “I don’t think you realize Daddy’s financial situation. He’s got too much pride to tell you.”


“He’d be furious if he knew we were talking to you about this,” Brenda said, “but Dad isn’t making a whole lot right now. He created a job so the parole board would help you get out.”

“If you need ten dollars,” said Toni, “Daddy will be there. But not just to buy a six-pack and then come home and sit around and drink beer.”


Toni would put it this way. She and, Brenda understood it was difficult for Gary to know what to do with his money. After all, he had never had to manage his weekly pay before.

Gary answered, “Well, yeah, I don’t seem to know. I go to buy something, and like I don’t have enough left. Suddenly I’m broke.” Toni assured him, “Gary, I figured once you understand Daddy doesn’t have money to keep loaning you, you will never put him in the position of asking him.”

“I feel bad,” said Gary, “about this. Vern has no money?”

“He has a little,” Brenda said. “But he’s hurting for money. He’s trying to save for his operation. Vern doesn’t carry on, but that leg gives him pain all the time.”

Gary sat with his head down, just thinking. “I didn’t realize,” he said, “I was putting Vern on the spot.”

Toni answered, “Gary, I know it’s hard. But try to settle down, just a little. What you spend for beer doesn’t sound like much, but it would make a difference to Mother and Daddy if you took five dollars and went and bought a sack of groceries, ’cause, you know, they’re feeding you, and clothing you, and board and room.”


Brenda now moved to the next topic. She knew Gary had needed time to unwind and work with somebody like Vern, whom he didn’t have to regard as a boss all the time. Yet the moment had come, maybe, to start thinking about a place of his own and a real job. She had even been doing some looking for him.

Gary said, “I don’t think I’m ready. I appreciate what you’re trying to do, Brenda, but I’d like to hang in with your folks a little longer.”

“Mother and Dad,” said Brenda, “haven’t had anybody living in their house since Toni got married. That’s been ten or twelve years. Gary, they love you, but I’ll be frank. You are starting to get on their nerves.”


“Maybe you better tell me about that job.”

“I’ve been talking,” said Brenda, “to the wife of a fellow who has an insulation shop. He’s Spencer McGrath. From what I hear, Spencer doesn’t act like a boss at all. He’s right in there with his men.”

While Brenda had not met him, she had spent, she explained, an enjoyable few minutes with McGrath’s wife, Marie. She was a pleasant woman, Brenda said, kind of heavyset, always smiling or chuckling, a strong Ma Kettle type.

Marie had said to Brenda, “If you don’t reach out your hand to someone coming out of prison, they’re going to turn right around and be frustrated and start getting in trouble again.” Society had to open up a little bit, she had said, if anybody was going to get rehabilitated.

“All right,” said Gary, “I’ll go meet the man. But,” he looked at them, “give me another week.”


After work, Gary came in with a sack of groceries. Just odds and ends and nothing to do with putting a meal together, but Ida took it as a happy gesture. It turned back her thoughts to a time thirty years ago and more when she had loaned Bessie $40 because Frank Gilmore was in jail. It took Bessie almost ten years, but she paid back that forty. Maybe Gary had the same characteristic. Ida decided to tell him about Margie Quinn.


She knew this nice girl, Marge, the daughter of a friend. About six years ago, Marge had a baby, but she was living alone now, raised her baby nicely. In fact, she stayed with her sister, and worked as a chambermaid down the street.

“Good looking,” Ida told him. “She’s a little sad, but she has beautiful blue eyes. They’re deep set.”

“Are her eyes as beautiful as yours, Ida?” asked Gary.

“Oh, git along, little doggie,” said Ida.


Gary said he’d like to see her right now.


The girl who was working the night shift in the Canyon Inn Motel office saw a tall man walk through the door. He came up with a big smile. “Oh,” he said, “you must be Margie.”

“No,” she said, “Margie isn’t here this shift.”

The fellow just left.


Margie Quinn got a phone call. A pleasant voice said, “I’m Gary, Ida’s nephew.” When she said hello, he replied that she had a nice voice and he’d like to meet her. She was busy that night, she told him, but come over tomorrow. She knew who he was.


Marjorie Quinn’s mother had already mentioned that Ida had a nephew just out of prison and wondered if Marge would consider going out with him. Marge asked what he had been in for, and learned it was robbery. She thought that wasn’t too bad. It was not like murder, after all. Since she was just dating one fellow at this time and not going steady, she thought, Well, it can’t hurt.


There was a smile on his face as she opened the door. He had a silly hat on, but otherwise seemed all right. She asked if he wanted a beer, and he sat and drank one in the living room, sitting back nicely on the couch. Marge introduced him to Sandy, her sister, who was living with her, and her daughter, and after a while she asked if he wanted to go for a ride up the canyon.


Before they got very far, Gary said, “Let’s get some more beer.” Marge said, “Well, I don’t care.”


Halfway up the pass, they stopped by Bridal Falls where a narrow stream of water fell for a thousand feet, but they didn’t take the gondola up. It was too expensive.

They sat by the river and talked awhile. It was beginning to get dark and Gary looked at the stars and told her how much he enjoyed them. When he was in prison, he rarely got to see them, he said. You could get out in the yard in the daytime, he explained, and catch plenty of sky above the wall, but the only time you’d ever see the stars was in the winter if you went to Court on some beef or other. Then, you might not be brought back to the penitentiary until late afternoon when it was already dark. On a clear evening, you could see the stars.

He began to talk to Marge about her eyes. They were beautiful, he told her. There was sadness in her eyes but also glints of moonbeam.


She thought he was a pleasant conversationalist. When he asked if she’d like to make a date to see a movie, she consented.


After that, however, a State Police car happened to go tearing up the canyon. His mood shifted. He started talking about cops. The more he spoke, the angrier he got. It came off him like an oven with the door open. She had second thoughts about going to the movies with him.


After the night got really dark, they continued up the canyon to Heber, stopped for more beer, then headed back. It must have been 10:30 by then. As they were coming down the hill into Provo, she said, “You don’t mind if I take you home now?”

He said, “I don’t want to go there.”

Marge said, “I have to get up for work tomorrow.”

“Tomorrow is Saturday.”

“That’s a big day at the motel.”

“Let’s go over to your house.”

She said, “Okay, for a little while. It can’t be for long.”


Her sister had gone to bed, so they sat in the living room. He kissed her. Then he started to do more.

She said, “I better take you home.”

“I don’t want to,” he said. “They’re not there.”

She insisted. She got him to go. It took all her powers of argument, but she drove him over. It was just a few blocks and when they got there, the lights were out. He said, “They’re not here.”


Now, she realized she was drunk. It came over suddenly that she was smashed. She managed to say, “Where do you want me to take you?”

“Over to Sterling’s.”

“Can’t you get in here?”

“I don’t want to.”

So she took him over to Sterling’s. When they got there he said, “Sterling isn’t up.” She said, “You can’t stay at my house.”


Still, they went back to her apartment. She didn’t want to get picked up for drunk driving, and at least she knew the way to her house.


In the living room, Gary started kissing her again. She was feeling miserable and wondering how to get out of this, when she passed out with her arms folded and her head down. By the time she stirred, he was gone. She woke up remembering she’d made a date to go to a movie with him sometime the following week.





4


Next morning, Gary phoned early. Marge told her sister to say she was not up. He called half an hour later, and Marge said, Just tell him I’m not here. That ended it, she hoped.


By Saturday night, Gary was drunk. Early in the evening he tried to convince Sterling Baker to drive him up to Salt Lake City, but Sterling talked him into going home. Now, Gary tried to warm Vern up for the trip, but got the answer that it was close to midnight and fifty miles one way, and let’s forget the idea. Gary answered, All right, just lend me your car. “Well,” Vern said, “you can’t take it.”


Gary gave a look. His eyes at such times had the fury of an eagle in a cage. Those eyes practically said to Vern, “Your ’69 gold Pontiac is out in the driveway, and so is your ’73 green Ford pickup. You won’t lend me either.” Aloud he said, “I’ll hitch.”


Vern could see Gary in a bar in Salt Lake looking for trouble. “Do what you wish,” said Vern. “I’d like you to stay here.”

“I’m on my way.”


After he left, Vern couldn’t take it. Before three minutes were gone, he said to Ida, “Hell, I’ll drive him.” He got into his car, thinking of the look on Gary’s face when he would pull up alongside, open the passenger door, and growl, “Why don’t you go to Salt Lake with this damn fool?” But Vern couldn’t find him. There was a place on West Fifth where you would start hitchhiking, only nobody was there. Vern went back and forth through the streets. Gary must have picked up a driver instantly.


Eight o’clock Sunday morning, Gary called from Idaho. He was 300 miles away. “How,” said Vern, “did you get there?”

Well, said Gary, this dude picked him up and he fell asleep, and the fellow went right through Salt Lake. By the time he woke up, it was Idaho. “Vern,” said Gary, “I’m broke. Could you come and get me?”

“Maybe Brenda will go,” said Vern, “but I sure won’t.” He took a breath.

“You won’t come and get me?” Gary sounded real aggravated. A lot yawned between them. Vern said, “Stay where you are. I’ll call Brenda.”


“What,” asked Brenda, “are you doing up north?”

“I wanted to drop in on Mom,” said Gary. “You see, I ran into this fellow in Provo who has friends in Idaho. He said, ‘Let’s visit my buddies, then shoot you on up to Portland.’ ”

“Oh, God,” said Brenda. He had violated his parole. He had been told not to leave the state.

“Anyway,” said Gary, “once we got to Idaho, this fellow got mad at me and took off. I’m stuck at this bar, Brenda, and I better get back. Can you come for me?”

“You poor thing,” said Brenda. “You just get your thumb out of your rear end and put it in the air.”


A few hours later, a long-distance call reached Mont Court at his home. He was asked to contact Detective Jensen in Twin Falls, Idaho. Mont Court then learned that his parolee, Gary Gilmore, had been arrested for driving without a license. How should they proceed, Detective Jensen wanted to know? Mont Court thought awhile and recommended that Gilmore be allowed to go back to Utah on his own recognizance, and then report in to him immediately.


Brenda got another phone call. Gary was in Twin Falls, he said. Had been hitchhiking and got a ride with a fellow driving a pickup truck. When they stopped in a bar, the guy started making passes. Gary had to fight him right in the bar. Then, they went to the parking lot to finish. He knocked the guy out.


“Brenda, I thought I killed him. God, I really thought I killed him. I put him in his pickup, and drove like a maniac. I figured if I could find a hospital, I’d drop him off there.

“Then the guy went into a seizure. I stopped the car and got his wallet out to see his name—in case he was dying. Then I started speeding for a hospital. Soon as the cops pulled me over, the guy came to. He told the police he wanted me booked for assault and battery, kidnap, stealing his wallet, and taking his truck.”


Brenda was trying to follow it all.

“I had some of my week’s pay,” said Gary, “and that was enough to post bail for driving without the license. Then, I worked it out.”

“You did?” said Brenda. “My God, how?”

“Well, you see, the fellow was known as a faggot around here. I guess the cops were on my side, and talked him into dropping the charges. I don’t have to go back.”

“I can’t believe it,” said Brenda.

“Coz, there’s just one thing,” said Gary, “I used up my money to post the bail, I don’t know how I’ll get back.”

“You better,” said Brenda. “If you’re not here by morning, I’m calling Mont Court. He’d love to give you a free ride back.”

“Mont Court knows already,” said Gary.

Brenda blew. “You dodo bird,” she told him. “You’re really dumb!”


It was a long Sunday. A spring snow had started and by evening it was close to a blizzard. In the living room, Brenda got tired of looking at her red rug, her red furniture and her black wrought-iron lamps. She was ready to start kicking a few kids’ toys. Kept going over it with Johnny, trying to find some kind of hope for Gary in all this. It was good, she thought, that he hadn’t run off from the guy he beat up. That showed some sense of responsibility. On the other hand, had he rode off with him in the truck because the man would be easy to rob that way? And how had he gotten the fellow to drop the charges? By his boyish smile?


It was time to recognize, Brenda decided gloomily, that when you had Gary around, there were questions for which you would not get answers. The snow kept coming down. Out on the roads, the universe would be just one big white field.





5


Around nine in the evening, Gary called from Salt Lake. Now he was broke for sure. He was also stranded in the snow.

Johnny was watching a show he liked on TV. “Well,” he said, “I’m not going to get the damn fool.”

Brenda said: “It is my side of the family that’s acting up, so may I take your truck?” It had four-wheel drive and a CB radio, and her Maverick was too light.

Toni happened to be over and she said she’d go along. Brenda was glad. Toni knew the roads better in Salt Lake.


It was snowing so hard, Brenda almost missed the exit on the Interstate. The bar was out past the airport, and proved to be the dippiest damn dive Brenda ever laid eyes on. Leave it to Gary to find the trashiest place to land.

When they walked in the door, he was chatting with the bartender. It struck Brenda immediately that he had plenty of change on the counter.


Gary gave them a great wide smile. “How’s the two foxiest ladies in the whole world?” Oh, was he sopped! So proud: his private peacocks had just come parading through the door. Brenda looked at Toni and said, “What do we do with the drunken sot?”


They had their arms around his neck to steady him. He put his arms around them.

“Are you ready to go, Gary?”

“Let me finish my beer.”

Brenda said, “Drink it by the door.” She didn’t want to stand in the middle of this bar with all these drunks leering at them. Never in her life had she been undressed as many times in 30 seconds.


“Gary, you found yourself a dandy place to stop.”

“Well, it was warm,” he said. He always had a real explanation for things.


“By the way,” he said, his mouth on the glass of beer, “I’ve got my turn coming up to play pool.”

“You,” Brenda said, “are planning to stay here and play pool?”





“Well,” he said, “I got a good bet in the making.”





